draft/0201-simplified-routing-syntax.rst, before:

===================================
DEP 0201: Simplified routing syntax
===================================

:DEP: 0201
:Author: Tom Christie, Sjoerd Job Postmus, Aymeric Augustin
:Implementation Team: Sjoerd Job Postmus
:Shepherd: Aymeric Augustin
:Status: Draft
:Type: Feature
:Created: 2016-10-19
:Last-Modified: 2017-05-12

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 3
   :local:

Abstract
========

This DEP aims to introduce a simpler and more readable routing syntax to
Django. Additionally the new syntax would support type coercion of URL
parameters.

We would plan for this to become the new convention by default, but would do so
in a backwards compatible manner, leaving the existing regex based syntax as an
option.

Motivation
==========

Here's a section directly taken from Django's documentation on URL
configuration...

.. code-block:: python

    urlpatterns = [
        url(r'^articles/2003/$', views.special_case_2003),
        url(r'^articles/(?P<year>[0-9]{4})/$', views.year_archive),
        url(r'^articles/(?P<year>[0-9]{4})/(?P<month>[0-9]{2})/$', views.month_archive),
        url(r'^articles/(?P<year>[0-9]{4})/(?P<month>[0-9]{2})/(?P<day>[0-9]{2})/$', views.article_detail),
    ]

There are two aspects to this that we'd like to improve on:

* The Regex based URL syntax is unnecessarily verbose and complex for the vast
  majority of use-cases.
* The existing URL resolver system does not handle typecasting, meaning that
  all URL parameters are treated as string literals.

In order to do so we propose to implement a new URL routing option, based on
the Flask URL syntax. This is a simpler and more readable format. Unlike the
regex approach, this syntax also includes type information, allowing us to
provide for typecasting of the URL parameters that are passed to views.

The existing syntax would remain available, and there would be no plans to
place it on a deprecation path. Indeed, the underlying implementation for the
typed URL syntax would actually be to use expand the typed URLs out into the
existing Regex style, although this would largely remain an implementation
detail, rather than an exposed bit of API.

The end result is that we would like to be able to present the following
interface to our developers...

.. code-block:: python

    urlpatterns = [
        path('articles/2003/', views.special_case_2003),
        path('articles/<int:year>/', views.year_archive),
        path('articles/<int:year>/<int:month>/', views.month_archive),
        path('articles/<int:year>/<int:month>/<int:day>/', views.article_detail),
    ]

The ``path()`` argument would also accept arguments without a converter prefix,
in which case the converter would default to "string", accepting any text
except a ``'/'``.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    urlpatterns = [
        path('users/', views.user_list),
        path('users/<id>/', views.user_detail),
    ]

For further background, please see the `"Challenge teaching Django to beginners: urls.py" <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/django-developers/u6sQax3sjO4>`_ discussion group thread.

Core vs Third-Party
===================

In our consideration this feature should be included in core Django rather than
as a third-party app, because it adds significant value and readability.

It is far more valuable when presented to the community as *the new standard*,
rather than as an alternative style that can be bolted on. If presented as a
third-party add-on then the expense of a codebase going against the standard
URL convention will likely always prevent widespread uptake.

Specification
=============

Imports
-------

The naming for the import needs to be decided on. The existing URL configuration
uses:

.. code-block:: python

    from django.conf.urls import url

The naming question would be:

* What should the new style be called? Would we keep ``url``, or would we need
  to introduce a different name to avoid confusion?
* Where should the new style be imported from?

Our constraints here are that the existing naming makes sense, but we also need
to ensure that we don't break backwards compatiblility.

Our proposal is that we should use a diffrent name and that the new style should
be imported as...

.. code-block:: python

    from django.urls import path

A consistently named regex specific import would also be introduced...

.. code-block:: python

    from django.urls import path_regex

The name ``path`` makes semantic sense here, because it actually does represent
a URL component, rather than a complete URL.

The existing import of ``from django.conf.urls import url`` would become a shim
for the more explicit ``from django.urls import path_regex``.

Given that it is currently used in 100% of Django projects, the smooth path for
users would be to not deprecate its usage immediately, but to consider placing
it on the deprecation path at a later date.

Converters
----------

Flask supports the `following converters <http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/0.11/quickstart/#variable-rules>`_.

``string``
    Accepts any text without a slash (the default)
``int``
    Accepts integers
``float``
    Like ``int`` but for floating point values
``path``
    Like the default but also accepts slashes
``uuid``
    Accepts UUID strings

Furthermore, an interface for implementing custom converters should exist. We
could use the same API as Flask's ``BaseConverter`` for this purpose. The
registration of custom converters could be handled as a Django setting,
``CUSTOM_URL_CONVERTERS``. The default set of converters should probably 
*always* be included.

Failure to perform a type conversion against a captured string should result in
an ``Http404`` exception being raised.

Definining type conversions
---------------------------

A converter is an object with three attributes/methods.

``regex``
    The pattern use in place of the type-specifier.
``to_python``
    How to convert the string from the URL to a Python object.
``to_url``
    How to convert the Python object back to something suitable in a URL.

For instance, a converter for handling with the ``int`` parameter can be
defined as follows.

.. code-block:: python

    class IntConverter(object):
        regex = '-?[0-9]+'

        def to_python(self, value):
            return int(value)

        def to_url(self, value):
            return str(value)

Here, ``to_python`` is going to be called as part of ``resolve`` while
``to_url`` will be called during ``reverse``.

If ``to_python`` raises a ``ValueError``, it will be interpreted as if the
given path does not match the URL, and resolving will continue. This gives the
ability to deal with cases where the validity of the content can not easily or
fully be described using a regular expression alone. No other exceptions are
caught.

The method ``to_url`` will always be called, no matter the type of ``value``.
In particular, it will be called even when ``value`` is a string. This allows
one to implement---for instance---a ``base64`` converter or a converter that
works wth signed values as handled by ``django.core.signing.TimestampSigner``.

Adding type conversion to the existing system
---------------------------------------------

Adding a new URL syntax is easy enough, as they can be mapped onto the existing
Regex syntax. The more involved piece of work would be providing for type
conversion with the existing regex system. It is our proposal that the type
conversion (at first) only works for named capture groups. This because the
``path`` function only builds named capture groups.

One option could be:

* Add a new ``converters`` argument to the ``url`` function. This argument is
  intended to be a private-but-stable API, rather than documented.
* The value of the ``converters`` argument is a dictionary, with keys
  corresponding to capture group names and the corresponding values being
  instances of ``BaseConverter`` (or something that duck-types the same way).
* The type specifiers as supplied in the arguments to ``path`` will be used to
  build the ``converters`` argument for ``path_regex``.

Type conversions and ``reverse``
--------------------------------

To support the ``reverse`` method on ``path``-based routes, the type converters
will have to supply a ``to_url`` method which does the reversing. There will be
no support for passing ``converter.to_url(value)`` to ``reverse``, because some
``to_url`` functions might actually have text as input.

As an implementation detail, the plan is to call ``converter.to_url`` instead
of ``force_text`` in ``_reverse_with_prefix``. The downside is that the
conversion now has to happen inside a loop, instead of only once, which might
have performance drawbacks.

Preventing unintended errors
----------------------------

*The following behaviour is not necessary, and we might not choose to add
this. However, it is worth considering a way to guard against user error...*

Even with differently named functions there remains some potential for user
error. For example:

* A developer using Django's new URL system accidentally uses
  ``from django.conf.urls import url``, and fails to notice the error. They are
  unaware that they are using regex URLs, not typed URLs, and cannot determine
  why the project is not working as expected.
* A developer who is continuing to use regex URLs incorrectly uses the
  ``fram django.urls import path`` and fails to notice the error. They are
  unaware that they are using typed URLs, not regex URLs, and cannot determine
  why the project is not working as expected.

One way to guard against this would be to:

* Enforce that new style ``path()`` arguments must not start with a leading
  ``'^'``.
* Enforce that old style ``url()`` arguments must start with a leading ``'^'``.

This behaviour would ensure that the two different cases could not be used
incorrectly.

There is a decidedly edge-case deprecation that this would introduce in that
existing projects that happen to *intentionally* include an unachored URL regex
would raise a ``ConfigurationError`` when upgraded. However this is a loud and
documentable error, with a simple resolution. (Change the import to
``from django.urls import path_regex``.)

Internal ``RegexURLPattern`` API
================================

New style URLs should make the original string available to introspection using
a ``.path`` attribute on the path instance.

They should be implemented as a ``TypedURLPattern`` that subclasses
``RegexURLPattern``.

These are aspects of the internal API, and would not be documented behaviour.

Documentation
=============

The new style syntax would present a cleaner interface to developers. It would
be beneficial for us to introduce the newer syntax as the primary style, with
the existing regex style as a secondary option.

It is suggested that we should update all URL examples accross the
documentation to use the new style.

Implementation tasks
====================

The following independent tasks can be identified:

* Implement several ``Converters``, and document the API.
* Implement the ``converters`` argument. This adds the low-level API support
  for type coercion. Ensure that lookups perform type coercion, and
  correspondingly, that calls to ``reverse`` work correctly with typed
  arguments.
* Add support for the new style ``path`` function, with an underlying
  implementation based on the regex urls.
* Add ``path_regex``, with ``from django.conf.urls import url`` becoming a shim
  for it.
* Add support for registering custom converters, as defined in the Django
  settings.
* Document the new style URL configuration.
* Update existing URL cases in the documentation throughout.
* Update the tests throughout, updating to the new style wherever possible.

Routing on different aspects
============================

`Django Hosts <http://django-hosts.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ allows for
routing based on the host aspect of a request. Django Channels has a message
routing layer, which can inspect different aspects of the messages.

While it would be a good idea to see if the routing layer can be augmented to
remove the need for django-hosts and be useful for Channels, it is our opinion
that these are orthogonal concerns. Due to the expected implementation burden
to also support these concerns, it is our preference that this is to be
reconsidered at a later point in time, as to not delay the progress on the
simplified routing syntax.

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain per the Creative Commons
CC0 1.0 Universal license (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed).

Commit message:

Update specification of converters.
Remove float, add slug.

Replace CUSTOM_URL_CONVERTERS with register_converter.

draft/0201-simplified-routing-syntax.rst, after:

===================================
DEP 0201: Simplified routing syntax
===================================

:DEP: 0201
:Author: Tom Christie, Sjoerd Job Postmus, Aymeric Augustin
:Implementation Team: Sjoerd Job Postmus
:Shepherd: Aymeric Augustin
:Status: Draft
:Type: Feature
:Created: 2016-10-19
:Last-Modified: 2017-05-12

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 3
   :local:

Abstract
========

This DEP aims to introduce a simpler and more readable routing syntax to
Django. Additionally the new syntax would support type coercion of URL
parameters.

We would plan for this to become the new convention by default, but would do so
in a backwards compatible manner, leaving the existing regex based syntax as an
option.

Motivation
==========

Here's a section directly taken from Django's documentation on URL
configuration...

.. code-block:: python

    urlpatterns = [
        url(r'^articles/2003/$', views.special_case_2003),
        url(r'^articles/(?P<year>[0-9]{4})/$', views.year_archive),
        url(r'^articles/(?P<year>[0-9]{4})/(?P<month>[0-9]{2})/$', views.month_archive),
        url(r'^articles/(?P<year>[0-9]{4})/(?P<month>[0-9]{2})/(?P<day>[0-9]{2})/$', views.article_detail),
    ]

There are two aspects to this that we'd like to improve on:

* The Regex based URL syntax is unnecessarily verbose and complex for the vast
  majority of use-cases.
* The existing URL resolver system does not handle typecasting, meaning that
  all URL parameters are treated as string literals.

In order to do so we propose to implement a new URL routing option, based on
the Flask URL syntax. This is a simpler and more readable format. Unlike the
regex approach, this syntax also includes type information, allowing us to
provide for typecasting of the URL parameters that are passed to views.

The existing syntax would remain available, and there would be no plans to
place it on a deprecation path. Indeed, the underlying implementation for the
typed URL syntax would actually be to use expand the typed URLs out into the
existing Regex style, although this would largely remain an implementation
detail, rather than an exposed bit of API.

The end result is that we would like to be able to present the following
interface to our developers...

.. code-block:: python

    urlpatterns = [
        path('articles/2003/', views.special_case_2003),
        path('articles/<int:year>/', views.year_archive),
        path('articles/<int:year>/<int:month>/', views.month_archive),
        path('articles/<int:year>/<int:month>/<int:day>/', views.article_detail),
    ]

The ``path()`` argument would also accept arguments without a converter prefix,
in which case the converter would default to "string", accepting any text
except a ``'/'``.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    urlpatterns = [
        path('users/', views.user_list),
        path('users/<id>/', views.user_detail),
    ]

For further background, please see the `"Challenge teaching Django to beginners: urls.py" <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/django-developers/u6sQax3sjO4>`_ discussion group thread.

Core vs Third-Party
===================

In our consideration this feature should be included in core Django rather than
as a third-party app, because it adds significant value and readability.

It is far more valuable when presented to the community as *the new standard*,
rather than as an alternative style that can be bolted on. If presented as a
third-party add-on then the expense of a codebase going against the standard
URL convention will likely always prevent widespread uptake.

Specification
=============

Imports
-------

The naming for the import needs to be decided on. The existing URL configuration
uses:

.. code-block:: python

    from django.conf.urls import url

The naming question would be:

* What should the new style be called? Would we keep ``url``, or would we need
  to introduce a different name to avoid confusion?
* Where should the new style be imported from?

Our constraints here are that the existing naming makes sense, but we also need
to ensure that we don't break backwards compatiblility.

Our proposal is that we should use a diffrent name and that the new style should
be imported as...

.. code-block:: python

    from django.urls import path

A consistently named regex specific import would also be introduced...

.. code-block:: python

    from django.urls import path_regex

The name ``path`` makes semantic sense here, because it actually does represent
a URL component, rather than a complete URL.

The existing import of ``from django.conf.urls import url`` would become a shim
for the more explicit ``from django.urls import path_regex``.

Given that it is currently used in 100% of Django projects, the smooth path for
users would be to not deprecate its usage immediately, but to consider placing
it on the deprecation path at a later date.

Converters
----------

Django will support the following converters out of the box:

``string``
    Accepts any text without a slash (this is the default converter)
``int``
    Accepts non-negative integers
``path``
    Accepts any text
``slug``
    Accepts ASCII-only slugs, based on the same definition as ``SlugField``
``uuid``
    Accepts UUIDs

Furthermore, an interface for registering custom converters is provided:

.. code-block:: python

    from django.urls import register_converter

    register_converter(Converter, 'conv')

Users are expected to call ``register_converter`` in their URLconf module, to
make sure converters are registered before the URLconf is loaded.

``register_converter`` may also be used as a decorator:

.. code-block:: python

    @register_converter('conv')
    class Converter:
        ...

No ``unregister_converter`` function will be implemented because there's no
clear use case.

Failure to perform a type conversion against a captured string should result in
an ``Http404`` exception being raised.

Definining type conversions
---------------------------

A converter is an object with three attributes/methods.

``regex``
    The pattern use in place of the type-specifier.
``to_python``
    How to convert the string from the URL to a Python object.
``to_url``
    How to convert the Python object back to something suitable in a URL.

For instance, a converter for handling with the ``int`` parameter can be
defined as follows.

.. code-block:: python

    class IntConverter(object):
        regex = '-?[0-9]+'

        def to_python(self, value):
            return int(value)

        def to_url(self, value):
            return str(value)

Here, ``to_python`` is going to be called as part of ``resolve`` while
``to_url`` will be called during ``reverse``.

If ``to_python`` raises a ``ValueError``, it will be interpreted as if the
given path does not match the URL, and resolving will continue. This gives the
ability to deal with cases where the validity of the content can not easily or
fully be described using a regular expression alone. No other exceptions are
caught.

The method ``to_url`` will always be called, no matter the type of ``value``.
In particular, it will be called even when ``value`` is a string. This allows
one to implement---for instance---a ``base64`` converter or a converter that
works wth signed values as handled by ``django.core.signing.TimestampSigner``.

Adding type conversion to the existing system
---------------------------------------------

Adding a new URL syntax is easy enough, as they can be mapped onto the existing
Regex syntax. The more involved piece of work would be providing for type
conversion with the existing regex system. It is our proposal that the type
conversion (at first) only works for named capture groups. This because the
``path`` function only builds named capture groups.

One option could be:

* Add a new ``converters`` argument to the ``url`` function. This argument is
  intended to be a private-but-stable API, rather than documented.
* The value of the ``converters`` argument is a dictionary, with keys
  corresponding to capture group names and the corresponding values being
  instances of ``BaseConverter`` (or something that duck-types the same way).
* The type specifiers as supplied in the arguments to ``path`` will be used to
  build the ``converters`` argument for ``path_regex``.

Type conversions and ``reverse``
--------------------------------

To support the ``reverse`` method on ``path``-based routes, the type converters
will have to supply a ``to_url`` method which does the reversing. There will be
no support for passing ``converter.to_url(value)`` to ``reverse``, because some
``to_url`` functions might actually have text as input.

As an implementation detail, the plan is to call ``converter.to_url`` instead
of ``force_text`` in ``_reverse_with_prefix``. The downside is that the
conversion now has to happen inside a loop, instead of only once, which might
have performance drawbacks.

Preventing unintended errors
----------------------------

*The following behaviour is not necessary, and we might not choose to add
this. However, it is worth considering a way to guard against user error...*

Even with differently named functions there remains some potential for user
error. For example:

* A developer using Django's new URL system accidentally uses
  ``from django.conf.urls import url``, and fails to notice the error. They are
  unaware that they are using regex URLs, not typed URLs, and cannot determine
  why the project is not working as expected.
* A developer who is continuing to use regex URLs incorrectly uses the
  ``fram django.urls import path`` and fails to notice the error. They are
  unaware that they are using typed URLs, not regex URLs, and cannot determine
  why the project is not working as expected.

One way to guard against this would be to:

* Enforce that new style ``path()`` arguments must not start with a leading
  ``'^'``.
* Enforce that old style ``url()`` arguments must start with a leading ``'^'``.

This behaviour would ensure that the two different cases could not be used
incorrectly.

There is a decidedly edge-case deprecation that this would introduce in that
existing projects that happen to *intentionally* include an unachored URL regex
would raise a ``ConfigurationError`` when upgraded. However this is a loud and
documentable error, with a simple resolution. (Change the import to
``from django.urls import path_regex``.)

Internal ``RegexURLPattern`` API
================================

New style URLs should make the original string available to introspection using
a ``.path`` attribute on the path instance.

They should be implemented as a ``TypedURLPattern`` that subclasses
``RegexURLPattern``.

These are aspects of the internal API, and would not be documented behaviour.

Documentation
=============

The new style syntax would present a cleaner interface to developers. It would
be beneficial for us to introduce the newer syntax as the primary style, with
the existing regex style as a secondary option.

It is suggested that we should update all URL examples accross the
documentation to use the new style.

Implementation tasks
====================

The following independent tasks can be identified:

* Implement several ``Converters``, and document the API.
* Implement the ``converters`` argument. This adds the low-level API support
  for type coercion. Ensure that lookups perform type coercion, and
  correspondingly, that calls to ``reverse`` work correctly with typed
  arguments.
* Add support for the new style ``path`` function, with an underlying
  implementation based on the regex urls.
* Add ``path_regex``, with ``from django.conf.urls import url`` becoming a shim
  for it.
* Add support for registering custom converters, as defined in the Django
  settings.
* Document the new style URL configuration.
* Update existing URL cases in the documentation throughout.
* Update the tests throughout, updating to the new style wherever possible.

Routing on different aspects
============================

`Django Hosts <http://django-hosts.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ allows for
routing based on the host aspect of a request. Django Channels has a message
routing layer, which can inspect different aspects of the messages.

While it would be a good idea to see if the routing layer can be augmented to
remove the need for django-hosts and be useful for Channels, it is our opinion
that these are orthogonal concerns. Due to the expected implementation burden
to also support these concerns, it is our preference that this is to be
reconsidered at a later point in time, as to not delay the progress on the
simplified routing syntax.

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain per the Creative Commons
CC0 1.0 Universal license (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed).
